Let us now look
at access control files.
Most of the access
control files in Linux
are stored under the /etc directory.
This directory can be read
by any user by default,
but only the root user
has access to write to it.
The access control
files are also designed
in a way that they
should never be modified
using a text editor.
Instead, use the built-in commands
to add or modify access as needed.
We will see how to do that
in the next lecture.
For now, let us look at the basic
access control files in Linux.
The first one of interest
is the /etc/passwd file,
which is also commonly known as just
the password file.
We have already seen
that this file contains
basic information about
the users in the system
including the username,
UID, GID,
home directory,
their default shell.
It is important to note that this
file does not save any passwords.
The passwords are stored
in another file located
at /etc/shadow.
The contents of this file are hashed.
The /etc/group file
stores information
about all user groups on the system,
such as
the group name and GID and members.
Let us now look at these access
control files in a bit more detail.
In these files, each line represents
information about
a particular user or a group.
These lines have multiple fields
that are delimited by a colon.
For the password file,
the fields separated
are username, password,
UID, GID, gecos,
the home directory of the user,
the shell.
Username is self-explanatory
in a mandatory field.
This is also the login name.
The password field is X because it
is located in the /etc/shadow file.
Next are the UID and GIDs
for the user.
These two fields are
mandatory as well.
Gecos is a CSV format
or a comma-separated
list of user information
such as full name,
location, phone number, et cetera.
This is optional and can be blank.
The home directory is the
path to the user's home directory.
Finally, the last field
is the default shell
for the user, which
in the case of Bob is
the bash shell.
Now, let us look at
the /etc/shadow file.
The fields of the file
are separated by a colon.
Reading from left to right,
the fields are username,
which is the same as the one used
in the password file,
password, which is
the field containing
the encrypted password.
An asterisk or empty field implies
the password was
never set for this user.
The next field is thelast changed,
which is the date
since the password was last changed.
This value is in epoch,
which is a Unix timestamp
described as the number of days
that have elapsed since midnight
January 1st, 1970.
The next two fields are
the minimum and maximum age.
These describe
the minimum number of days
the user will have to wait
before being allowed
to change the password
again and the maximum
number of days before
which the user will
have to change the password.
The next field is the
number of days before
a password is going
to expire that the user
should be warned so that
they can change the password.
The field inactive is
the number of days after
a password has
expired that it should still
be accepted before being disabled.
This is empty in this example,
which means it is not enforced.
The last field is the expiry
date of the password.
This is, again, in epoch and is
the date
when the account will be expired.
This field is empty, which implies
the account will never expire.
The last access control file
we will take a look at
is the /etc/group file.
Just like the other
access control files,
the fields are delimited by a colon.
This file stores basic information
about the groups on the system.
It is sometimes called
the group file.
The first field is the
name of the group,
followed by the password,
which is normally set to X,
indicating that this is saved
in the shadow file,
the same as the password file.
Next, is the GID of the group.
The last field contains
the members of
the group, which can
be comma-separated.